OpenSearch ingestion blog (#2428)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-11-20-unlocking-the-secrets-to-ingestion.md

# Host Settings

### JVM Optimization

There are a few optimizations to look into when you are setting up your cluster for OpenSearch. For those who may not know, OpenSearch is a project written in Java and it relies on the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) to run. When the JVM starts up it uses a set amount of memory based on the default configuration (1Gb out of the box). This means that even if you attempt to run OpenSearch on a machine that has 32Gb it will not be able to take full advantage of those resources unless you adjust the settings.

For ingest heavy workloads we recommend setting the JVM size to half of your available memory. There are two ways this can be set:

1. JVM config file (tarball install): `/config/jvm.options`

```bash
# /config/jvm.options

# Min JVM memory size
- Xms16g

# Max JVM memory size
- Xmx16g
```

1. Environment variable (container based installs): `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS`

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Xms16g -Xmx16g“
```

### Translog Flush

> A translog flush is when OpenSearch commits the items that have been ingested but not persisted to on-disk Lucene segments. By default this happens every time the translog reaches 512MB. Increasing the translog flush size reduces the frequency of these operations which are resource intensive. Additionally they create larger Lucene segments which merge less frequently saving even more resources for ingestion. To see your current translog statistics you can use the [node stats](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/api-reference/nodes-apis/nodes-stats/) endpoint like so: `curl -XPOST "<cluster url>/<index name>/_stats/flush?pretty"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A translog flush is when OpenSearch commits the items that have been ingested but not persisted to on-disk Lucene segments. By default this happens every time the translog reaches 512MB. Increasing the translog flush size reduces the frequency of these operations, which are resource intensive. Additionally, they create larger Lucene segments, which merge less frequently, saving even more resources for ingestion. To see your current translog statistics you can use the [node stats](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/api-reference/nodes-apis/nodes-stats/) endpoint like so: `curl -XPOST "<cluster url>/<index name>/_stats/flush?pretty"`.
```

> We recommend setting the translog flush size to around 25% of your available Java heap defined earlier. On a node with 16GB of memory we would set our heap to 50% of the available memory which would be 8GB for the heap. Then we would take 25% of the heap to set aside for the translog flushes or 2GB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend setting the translog flush size to around 25% of your available Java heap defined earlier. On a node with 16GB of memory we would set our heap to 50% of the available memory, which would be 8GB for the heap. Then we would take 25% of the heap to set aside for the translog flushes or 2GB.
```

```json
POST index-name/_settings
{
	"index" {
		"translog.flush_threshold_size": "2048MB"
	}
}
```

> Small note, the translog is not in memory. We set the translog threshold  to 25% of our memory because when the translog flushes it will transfer the data from disk into memory to be compiled into a Lucene segment to be persisted to disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Small note, the translog is not in memory. We set the translog threshold to 25% of our memory because when the translog flushes it will transfer the data from disk into memory to be compiled into a Lucene segment to be persisted to disk.
```

> # Sharding and Replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Sharding and replication
```

Reviewer: Should this be formatted as a level 2 heading? Level 1 headings are used for main titles.

> We talked a little bit about threading earlier and now we will dive a little bit more into mechanisms for making things happen in parallel. OpenSearch uses shards to partition indexes. Which shard an index goes to is based off a hash of it’s `_id`. There are primary shards and replica shards. Primary shards are responsible for ingestion and sending the data to the replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We talked a little bit about threading earlier and now we will dive a little bit more into mechanisms for making things happen in parallel. OpenSearch uses shards to partition indexes. Which shard an index goes to is based off a hash of its `_id`. There are primary shards and replica shards. Primary shards are responsible for ingestion and sending the data to the replicas.
```

> ### Primary Shard Distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Primary shard distribution
```

> We want to ensure we prioritize balancing our shards across nodes so the workload is evenly distributed. Without setting this we could end up with a situation like the one below where all our primary shards for end up on the same node. That would cause our Node 1 here to be completely saturated while the other nodes may be underutilized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to ensure we prioritize balancing our shards across nodes so that the workload is evenly distributed. Without setting this we could end up with a situation like the one below where all our primary shards end up on the same node. That would cause our Node 1 to be completely saturated while underutilizing the other nodes.
```

![Primary Shard Distribution](assets/media/blog-images/2023-11-20-unlocking-the-secrets-to-ingestion/PrimaryShardDistribution.svg){: .img-fluid }

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
	"persistent": {
		"cluster.rounting.allocation.balanace.prefer_primary": True
	}
}
```

> Enabling primary shard distribution ensures primary shards are given the first preference when it comes to spreading them across nodes. When this is enabled replicas may be more likely to end up on the same node however this is okay in an ingestion heavy workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling primary shard distribution ensures primary shards are given the first preference when it comes to spreading them across nodes. When this is enabled replicas may be more likely to end up on the same node; this is okay in an ingestion-heavy workload.
```

![Primary Shard Distribution Enabled](assets/media/blog-images/2023-11-20-unlocking-the-secrets-to-ingestion/PrimaryShardDistributionEnabled.svg){: .img-fluid }

> ### Segment Replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Segment replication
```

> One setting that dramatically impact ingestion is segment replication. Out of the box OpenSearch uses document replication. In this strategy data is first sent to the primary shard which then ingests it back into a Lucene segment. After it’s done that it will send the original unprocessed document to any replicas. They will then ingest the document back to their own Lucene segments. This works really well if you need more immediate consistency however it is duplicating the work done on the CPU for each replica.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One setting that dramatically impacts ingestion is segment replication. Out-of-the-box OpenSearch uses document replication. In this strategy data is first sent to the primary shard that then ingests it back into a Lucene segment. After it’s done that it will send the original unprocessed document to any replicas. They will then ingest the document back to their own Lucene segments. This works really well if you need more immediate consistency; however, it's duplicating the work done on the CPU for each replica.
```

![Document Replication](/assets/media/blog-images/2023-11-20-unlocking-the-secrets-to-ingestion/DocumentReplication.svg){: .img-fluid }

> With segment replication enabled the first two steps remain the same. Once it gets to the third step is where the magic happens. Instead of sending the original unprocessed document into the replicas we send the processed Lucene segment over the network. Now the nodes that the replicas live on will be free to use more of their compute for ingestion. This comes with a few caveats though. The first is you will be using more bandwidth between nodes as the segments are much larger than the initial documents. It’s important to consider your network topology here. Second, this model is an eventually consistent model as the document updates are not available as readily on replicas. The final, is you will want to increase the refresh interval of the nodes so you do not overwhelm the replica nodes with network traffic. We’ll discuss that more in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With segment replication enabled the first two steps remain the same. Once it gets to the third step is where the magic happens. Instead of sending the original unprocessed document into the replicas, we send the processed Lucene segment over the network. Now the nodes that the replicas live on will be free to use more of their compute for ingestion. This comes with a few caveats though. The first is you will be using more bandwidth between nodes, as the segments are much larger than the initial documents. It’s important to consider your network topology here. Second, this model is an eventually consistent model, as the document updates are not available as readily on replicas. Last, you will want to increase the refresh interval of the nodes so that you do not overwhelm the replica nodes with network traffic. We’ll discuss that more in the next section.
```

![Segment Replication](assets/media/blog-images/2023-11-20-unlocking-the-secrets-to-ingestion/SegmentReplication.svg){: .img-fluid }

> This setting needs to be applied before the index is created. If you have an index you would like to convert to segment replication you can create a new index and use one of OpenSearch’s reindex api’s to get the data in. Here is how you could configure segment replication for an index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setting needs to be applied before the index is created. If you have an index you would like to convert to segment replication, you can create a new index and use one of OpenSearch’s reindex APIs to get the data in. Here is how you could configure segment replication for an index.
```

```json
POST index-name/_settings
{
	"index": {
		"replication.type": "SEGMENT"
	}
}
```

> ### Refresh Interval

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Refresh interval
```

> This setting represents amount of time between when a document is received and when it is sent to replicas. This can either be set at a cluster level or on a per-index level. By default OpenSearch uses a 1 second refresh interval but that is probably faster than needed for most people with the observability use case. Below is how you could set that in the index settings. You can change this refresh interval even after the index has already been created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setting represents amount of time between when a document is received and when it's sent to replicas. This can either be set at a cluster level or on a per-index level. By default OpenSearch uses a 1 second refresh interval, but that is probably faster than needed for most people with the observability use case. Below is how you could set that in the index settings. You can change this refresh interval even after the index has been created.
```

```json
POST index-name/_settings
{
	"index": {
		"refresh_interval": "30s"
	}
}
```

> As we mentioned in the previous section we increase this delay so that we are sending segments less frequently. They are much larger than the original documents so sending them more quickly could end up saturating the connection of a node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we mentioned in the previous section, we increase this delay so that we are sending segments less frequently. They are much larger than the original documents, so sending them more quickly could end up saturating the connection of a node.
```

> # Compression Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Compression settings
```

> When you are storing large amounts of data it can be handy to use compression to minimize on disk size. We have a few different compression algorithms that you can use but the one we will talk about is Zstandard compression (ZSTD). This compression works well because it is tunable, meaning it lets you prioritize either speed or level of compression. Below is the setting we can use to enable ZSTD compression. Note, the compression level is a default of 3 with 6 being the most compressed and 1 being the least.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are storing large amounts of data it can be handy to use compression to minimize on disk size. We have a few different compression algorithms that you can use. The one we will talk about is Zstandard compression (ZSTD). This compression works well because it's tunable, meaning it lets you prioritize either speed or level of compression. Below is the setting we can use to enable ZSTD compression. Note, the compression level is a default of 3, with 6 being the most compressed and 1 being the least.
```

```json
POST index-name/_settings
{
	"index": {
		"codec": "zstd_no_dict",
		"codec.compression_level": 3
	}
}
```

> # End to End

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# End to end
```

> Here are the overall settings that I used (excluding the host settings as these aren’t applied through the cluster API’s). On the client side we are using the asynchronous python client to ensure we can saturate our network connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the overall settings that I used (excluding the host settings, as these aren’t applied through the cluster APIs). On the client side we are using the asynchronous Python client to ensure we can saturate our network connection.
```

For cluster settings, we balance the primary shards and enable segment replication back pressure. The back pressure setting prevents us from overwhelming the nodes if they fall behind the primary replica.

```json
{
  "persistent": {
    "cluster.routing.allocation.balance.prefer_primary": True,
    "segrep.pressure.enabled": True
  }
}
```

Then for our index, we increase the number of shards (and have only one replica for them). We turn on ZSTD compression to decrease the size on disk. Finally, we turn on segment replication and increase the refresh interval.

```json
POST index-name/_settings
{
  "index": {
    "number_of_shards": 3,
    "number_of_replicas": 1,
    "codec": "zstd_no_dict",
    "replication.type": "SEGMENT",
    "refresh_interval": "30s"
	}
}
```

> With all of these settings we were able to see a 65% improvement in ingestion speed and a 19% reduction of the size of our data on disk. These are some pretty serious gains for just doing some straightforward settings updates. While your experience may be different you now can tune your ingestion to fit the needs of your dataset! For more information, check out [Tuning your cluster for indexing speed](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/performance/) for a deeper dive on some of these strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With all of these settings we were able to see a 65% improvement in ingestion speed and a 19% reduction of the size of our data on disk. These are some pretty serious gains for just doing some straightforward settings updates. While your experience may be different, you now can tune your ingestion to fit the needs of your dataset! Check out [Tuning your cluster for indexing speed](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/tuning-your-cluster/performance/) for a deeper dive on some of these strategies.
```

> If enjoyed this post and wanted to see it with some more detail you can check out my presentation from OpenSearchCon 2023 that this blog was drawn from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If enjoyed this post and want to see it with some more detail, you can check out my presentation from OpenSearchCon 2023 that this blog was drawn from:
```

> {% include youtube-player.html id=page.ingestingToOpenSearch %}

Reviewer: Edit to image DocumentReplication.svg - Change "Out of the Box" to "Out-of-the-box".

Author: Resolved, thank you!
